Do you want me to read these? Do you want to read
these? Well, why don't we just start off with when
you did come to Galveston. Okay. And what was the
background that you came with? All right. I was
employed by the city of Galveston in the fall of
1977.
I was hired as, I would argue, as part of a reform
movement, a movement to professionalize city
government in Galveston. Prior to my being there,
Galveston had not had a history of having
professional planners, trained professional
planners. Only for a brief period of time, I
believe in 1971, 72, somewhere around that time,
did they actually have a degreed planner who was on
the staff. That person served for about one year
and then left. Galveston did have a comprehensive
plan. I believe it was prepared by Marvin
Springer. And I believe it was done sometime in the
1960s. It
was a typical kind of Springer plan. They also had a
zoning ordinance. And I'll be happy to send you
something that'll give you some specifics. I can
look up the dates on that and find out when they did
it. The plan was, of course, very outdated. The
zoning ordinance was very traditional, standard
kind of ordinance. It had been amended very
infrequently in the years since it was adopted,
and I'm not sure when it was, but again, I'll look
that up for you. The city didn't do a systematic
review of its plan. That plan was quite old when I
saw it. In terms of priorities, updating the plan
was not one of my priorities. Galveston is...
basically two cities, two distinct cities. One is
the area behind the seawall, and the other is the
area known as the West End or West Beach. It's
probably divided equally in two in that respect. I
think the West End is about 16 miles. It is not
behind the seawall. It is an environmentally
fragile area with dunes, very minimum
topography, probably seven or eight foot maximum
elevation. a lot of wetland vegetation. And the
predominant pattern of development out there was
a secondary home market with absentee ownership
for the most part. My perspective was that a
traditional kind of comprehensive plan was out of
place for Galveston. The built-up part was
already basically 90%, 95% urbanized. It was an
infill situation. That was not something that
dictated the need for a comprehensive plan. What
was really needed was neighborhood planning for
the built-up areas, for the infilling, for
revitalization. And so I committed the
department to doing neighborhood planning,
although it also was not the number one priority
that I had when I came. But I recognized that it was a
need. It was something that would be very useful to
us. So I did commit to having a person on our staff
that would work in that area. There was only one
staff member in the planning department when I
arrived, and that person was doing zoning
administration. Planning was under the
Department of Traffic. There was no physical
planning going on of any kind, no capital
improvements programming, no grant work. It was
strictly zoning and subdivision
administration. The plan that Springer had and
the comprehensive plan, had that much of an effect
on Yaxton?
Oh, I suspect that most of the island was developed
before Springer did his plan. And I would question
whether the plan was as much of a predictor as it was
as much as a recognizer of what was already there.
So it wasn't a plan that was meant to inspire. It was
a very typical, ordinary, very simple, in a not
very complex, comprehensive plan. They're very
suitable for their needs and certainly for their
capabilities. Well, again, I was hired as, again,
what I would argue is part of this reform movement.
They hired their first professional city manager
about six months to a year before I came. His name
was Tom Muhlenbeck. He was a graduate from city
management in the management program at Kansas
University. one of the more recognized programs
in city management. And he was committed to the
professionalism of the various departments, and
one of which was planning. So I was brought in as the
head of planning and traffic, and still we're
leaving planning and traffic together. But the
planning was of such importance at that time, they
moved me to the head of this department. I built up a
planning staff and brought in I believe, five
professional planners over the next two-year
period, most of them during the first year. Most of
them were quite young. In fact, I went to the three
planning schools that I had a great deal of respect
for to the University of Texas at Austin, Texas
A&M, and Oklahoma University, and hired the top
graduating students from each program. I went in
and asked the faculty who was number one, and
that's the student I wanted, and that's who we
hired. I created a good environment. for people
to, for the students, for the new planters to use
their skills that they learned in school and put
them to real world usefulness right off the bat
gave them a lot of responsibility, gave them
authority to go with the responsibility. We put a
major emphasis on environmental planning. There
had been a complete lack of environmental
planning in the history of the island.
in the urbanization that had taken place. It was a
classic case of man overcoming nature and
dominating it, showing how they could force
urbanization into an environmentally sensitive
area and do it with a great deal of unconcern about
what they were, the ecosystem they were
disturbing.
We received some financial assistance from the
state and a grant to develop this, what was called
the West End Ecosystem Plan. Ray Quay was the
environmental planner that I'd hired from the
University of Texas at Austin, who kind of
spearheaded this effort. We hired Kent Butler
from Texas A&M for a very small sum of money to do a
study for us. We worked with the Texas Marine
Affairs Council. Galveston at that time had its
own Marine Affairs Council. that the city council
had appointed probably maybe a year before I came,
very short lead time before I arrived on the scene
that they had created that group. Harris Kempner
from the Kempner family was the head of that group
and a big, strong supporter and advocate for
environmental planning and for some analysis of
what was happening at the port. At that time, there
was growing interest in deepening the port. And he
was concerned about what impact that would have on
the environment. Also at that time, the citizens,
or the city council anyway, politicized the
parking situation on West Beach. Under Texas law,
the beaches have historically been open, open to
everybody, common ownership, public ownership,
public access to the beaches. Part of the problem
in Galveston was that this was a very dense urban
area, or certainly close proximity to a very dense
urban area in the city of Houston. And the
population pressures on the beach were
overwhelming. We had unbelievable numbers of
vehicles driving on the beaches. And for example,
during one three-month period in a control area of
about one mile, we logged in almost 150 vehicular
accidents on the beach. Somewhere around 40 of
those accidents involved pedestrians with
vehicles. And a number of those accidents
involved vehicles and horses. So it was a very
unsafe, very hazardous, dangerous situation.
Apparently, there were quite a few professionals
hired into the city yourself, the city manager and
such. What was the impetus to bring that about all
at once in Galveston? I know that any place
politically has cycles and goes through swings.
Galveston was going through an enlightened
period where they felt they needed more
sophisticated government. There was a great deal
of dissatisfaction with the government. There
had historically been a great deal of
dissatisfaction. Galveston was very political.
They were one of the last cities, if not the last
city in the country, to do away with electing
department heads at large elections for. You
know, your planning director, your director of
traffic, director of public works, police chief,
fire chief. I believe up until darn near the late
50s, if I'm correct, they were electing these
department heads. Part of that reform movement
that took place then, I guess, resurfaced and was
trying to professionalize local government. And
Muhlenbeck was committed to that. The council
was, for the majority, committed to doing that.
And I think the community wanted it. So that's the
impetus behind this thing. We did
professionalize. We did bring in very competent,
quality people. We dealt with, I'll read through
here, some things that we did in the two-year
period from 77 to 79. We completed this beach and
dune management plan for Galveston Island that
was part of the West End ecosystem plan. That was a
major component of it. produced a West Beach
access and parking plan that provided the
planning basis and the ordinances for closing off
the beaches to vehicular traffic. And that became
the first time in the history of Texas that any part
of the beach had been closed off to vehicular
traffic. So that was very innovative, very
controversial. It got the Attorney General's
office involved in it, Senator Ray Swartz with
the, I can't remember what his committee was that
he was with, I held hearings on that. We had
something in Texas Monthly to the effect that what
we have done is taken a precious resource away from
the public. We were denying the public access to
the beaches. In reality, we were trying to correct
a very serious incompatibility problem between
pedestrians and vehicles. No city, no urban area
in Texas would allow a major road to go through
their park system where their kids are playing.
And that's, in essence, what that West End of the
Island was. That's a park system. We had other
problems. It was a very complex issue. But anyway,
we did treat those. For the first time, the
planning department produced a capital
improvements program. It was the 1978-1983
capital improvements program. It was a
legitimate, true, comprehensive capital
improvement program. We established
priorities. We looked at available funding
sources. We analyzed the financing capabilities
of the community. a good citizen participation
process to kind of help us in picking priorities.
The planning commission provided great
leadership in developing that plan, and it was
adopted by the city council. In fact, during this
two-year period of time, the planning commission
was the entity providing this critical
leadership that we needed to make these very
important planning projects come forward. They
were strong leaders, excellent advocates, And
they were really the force behind the force. The
city council was not that aggressive, was not that
supportive, very nervous as to what they were
doing. Many of the things that were done during
this two-year period that I'll continue reading
were done on split votes in the face of substantial
opposition. I can remember one of our proposals
was to create neighborhood planning
commissions. I'm not aware of any city in Texas
that has done that. We felt it was important
because of my desire to do neighborhood planning
in the redevelopment areas. We felt it was
important to use neighborhood planning
commissions because that was going to give us a
built-in group that would help coordinate the
plan and participate directly in preparing the
plan for each of these neighborhoods. We also were
starting, we had the community development block
grant program that was expanding and the attempt
was going to be made to let the neighborhoods have a
better, have more important, have a bigger role in
determining the priorities and how those funds
would be spent in their neighborhoods. The
Planning Commission supported this concept
100%. They did not see it as an infringement on
their commission rules. They were happy to share
it. They were happy to get this kind of
participation. The City Council had a tied vote on
whether or not to do this. It was three to three,
with one member absent. The member who was absent
was a very strong advocate of neighborhood
planning commissions. When he returned the next
week, the vote was It failed by four to three
instead of passing by four to three because the
mayor, Mayor Unbehagen, changed his vote from
being for it to being against it. So it did fail four
to three. The leading advocate for defeating this
movement was the city attorney, Bob Shattuck.
Bob's view was that the neighborhood planning
commission would end up usurping the authority of
the city council. It would end up putting
constraints on the council because it would be
very difficult for the council to use their
judgment or substitute their judgment in
neighborhood matters for the judgment of that
neighborhood commission. So for that, he
cautioned the council that this was a weakening of
their authority and their power. And he advised
them against doing that. And he finally ended up
winning the day in that area. When I arrived in
Galveston, their zoning ordinance, which was
quite old, was in various folders in files. It was
not all put together. One of the first things I did
was bring it all together and put it into a one
common book there where it could be kept current.
They made copies of it so the public could have
access to it.
The last year, toward the last year that I was
there, we developed a performance,
productivity, budgeting system. That was
something I was very strongly supportive of. I was
proposing to do something like the City of Dayton
had done, where the idea was to get a sense of
direction for the community, understand what we
were trying to achieve on the basis of some kind of
plans, and see that the budget's instruments were
used as a device for implementing the plan, rather
than the budget being the objective, having the
budget used as a planning device for implementing
council objectives. So I proposed going to this
program performance budget. We had a line on a very
traditional, antiquated kind of budgeting
system when I was there. I didn't have much support
for that. However, after about a year, a Backlash,
I'd say a continuing backlash, because basically
government had not demonstrated to the citizens
of Galveston that it was responsive to them. It was
tremendous dissatisfaction. Year in, year out,
the people in the council were turned out of
office. It was just, you served one term and you
were gone. The voters were not satisfied with the
services they were receiving. Well, finally,
this thing, the backlash was so substantial that
they passed a freeze, a rollback on taxes. It was a
charter amendment that, in essence, rolled back
taxes and froze the taxing level and the amount of
money that could be raised on taxes in any given
year. Even put libs on revenue so that we couldn't
even, in theory, bring in federal grants, if you
read that charter amendment
with preciseness. The manager's view was we
shouldn't fight this. We should let the citizen
groups you know, argument themselves. So we
didn't participate. We didn't even give them
information, which I thought was a mistake. The
manager's view was that he didn't want to be in a
situation such as in California where the
employees all said this was bad, you can't do it,
and then when it passes, turn around and do it, you
know, and say, well, what happened? You said we
were going to lose this and this and this. Why
didn't we? So he didn't want to suffer from that
credibility problem. So we didn't campaign. We
didn't participate. And this charter meeting was
overwhelmingly passed. And I believe in the first
year, it was going to necessitate a 25% to 30% cut in
the budget immediately right off the top. And it
was going to require additional cuts in years
beyond that because of the way it was phasing in. So
in order to get a handle on the budget and how to make
cuts, the manager accepted my year earlier
suggestion that they go to this productivity
management by objective kind of approach. to
making decisions. And we went to a citywide survey
where all the citizens in Galveston were asked to
assess the various services that they were
receiving. They were asked to assess the quality
of those services. And then they were asked to
indicate whether or not they favored an increase
or a decrease in those services, and what was the
magnitude of the decrease that they favored. We
had pretty good turnout. I believe it was 10%, 12%
of the citizens across the island that returned
our survey. That was used. in giving guidance to
the city council and selecting priorities for
making the budget cuts. So I was pleased to see us
going to that system, although, of course, I was
disappointed that it required the circumstance,
the painful experience, the budgetary
experience to make us go to that kind of system.
What's interesting about that is that that system
is no longer used today. That was retained. I left
after two years. The manager continued that. for
about another year after I left, and then that
manager left. And the new city manager, the
current city manager, Steve Huffman, does not use
that budgeting system anymore.
We started the first of the neighborhood planning
programs. It was the East End Neighborhood Plan.
We surveyed the neighborhood with mailbox and
personal visits to everybody, mail cards in the
mail. We got about a 10% response to our survey. We
asked him to identify issues, problems,
priorities, the typical kinds of information you
need to do a neighborhood plan. We attempted to
create an advisory group without the appointed
powers of the city council, without the council
appointing them because that had been rejected by
the council. And we did identify issues and we
prepared position papers and had a lot of
documentation for resolving those issues for at
least presenting alternatives for resolution of
those issues when I left. About a year after I left,
I would probably say, 80 or late 80, the first
neighborhood plan was produced. I believe now
they have completed two or three other
neighborhood plans in the last several years.
What's interesting about that, too, is now the
current city planning director, Roger Hendrick,
who replaced me, is gearing up to do a
comprehensive plan. His view is, at this point,
they have a need for a comprehensive plan. My view
was that comprehensive plan wasn't needed in the
built-up area. And that it was going to be very
difficult to produce a comprehensive plan for the
west end of the island because its shape was so
narrow and the environmental factors were so
significant that I thought a performance
management system was far better. And that's what
we were attempting to do with this West End
Ecosystem Plan with developing these
performance criteria and standards for urban
development. And I felt that was the way to go with
each development being reviewed through a
specific use permit or PUD kind of regulatory
process, as opposed to a general plan with
specific zoning districts that would allow uses
by right and standard setbacks i didn't feel there
was anything in the west end of the island that
allowed a standardization and uniformity with
with respect to the treatment development i
thought each area was uniquely different and
sensitive and therefore the comprehensive
planning approach would have been the wrong
approach to use roger just disagrees with me on
that Is it the different opinion of two
professionals, or is it more the situation of
Galveston has changed and it's becoming more so
appropriate for... I think it's a difference in
the professionals' views.
I think Roger and I are just different in that
respect. We have a very similar background,
but... He sincerely believes that you can do a
comprehensive plan for that wisdom of the island,
a meaningful plan. And I could not get a handle on
it. I'm basically used to doing my own
comprehensive plans. And I have done a number. And
in that situation, I could not see how I would
approach it. It looked to me like it required a
great deal of site-specific analysis. And that
does not lend itself to a comprehensive approach
to planning. Roger disagrees. And what is
interesting about this, though, he proposed to
hire consultants to do this. So if there's a
changed circumstance there, he has money that I
did not have, because we were a very poor
department when I was there. We reformed the way we
did zoning reports while I was there. I introduced
a very standardized format based on the old ASPO
report entitled Writing Better Zoning Reports.
It's a PAS study, a PAS report. And it was an attempt
to get a little bit more professionalism into the
zoning evaluation process. It was very well
received. The planning commission was
outstanding. Carolyn Stiles was the chairman
during the last year I was there. Jules Love was
chairman during the first year. Carolyn Stiles
may be one of the most outstanding citizen
planners there ever was. Just a very dedicated,
enthusiastic individual. very aggressive, very
active, who had some political clout behind the
scenes, along with some other people on our
commission, and made it possible for us to do a
large number of things in a very short period of
time here as I'm continuing to go through. I think
if you sum up in this when I finish, you're going to
see, gosh, in two years, coming in with no staff,
and the one staff person that was there during the
zoning administration left very shortly, After I
got there to go to law school as part of his career
plans, his wife was a medical student. He'd been
planning to leave, and she graduated, and she
graduated, and he left. So we built the staff for
nothing. We had literally no materials in our
offices. We didn't have any census materials. We
had no planning publications. Nothing relating
to planning was in that planning office, not a
document, except for several copies of the old
comprehensive plan that just happened to have
been preserved for some reason. We did some areas
and some things with respect to the historic
district. Galveston had two historical
districts that had been created in the early 70s.
Most people think of Galveston as being a classic
example of historical preservation and
successful efforts in historical preservation.
It's very beneficial to the economy, a
significant contributor to the economy. What's
particularly interesting about it, though, is at
the time I was there, The community, in general,
was not supportive of historical preservation.
And the city council was even anti-historical
preservation. The worst thing one could do at that
time was to suggest something involving
historical preservation. They were completely
turned off by it and sensitive to it. I think that
just had to do with the
unique culture of Galveston. Galveston is a
unique place. Every place is unique, but
Galveston is definitely unique. The attitude in
the island there of the average citizen,
certainly the elected officials, and I think they
did a pretty good job of representing the citizens
in this area, was that historical preservation
was elitism, was for some kind of upper crust
visitor. They basically took it for granted. They
didn't see anything special about those
buildings. It was just a rare combination of the
right people in the right time and the right events
that even made it possible for them to get that
historical district established, those two
districts in the early 70s. When I attempted to
expand the districts, I was completely rejected.
That was one area I could make no progress in
whatsoever. We had a landmark commission that was
grappling for help, didn't know how to respond to
the issues of new construction in our districts. I
was able to get a grant from the state of Texas
Historical Commission, and we hired Ellen
Beasley just before I left. my second year to do a
manual for guidelines for new construction that
was produced about a year after I left. That was
extremely beneficial to the Landmark Commission
because they did have a difficult time in
assessing these new construction projects and
trying to protect historical areas. I was able to
promote a historical district signage program
where we posted signs up in the city letting
visitors, tourists know where the districts were
and also putting in street signs in the district
that were different color, uniquely different,
so that the residents would know about it and
anybody else who wandered through that
neighborhood would know about it. I wanted,
therefore, a psychological value, an
educational value, a warning value in the sense
that you couldn't do anything in the historic
district without permits from the city. You
couldn't paint your porch. You couldn't replace
railing. The city had very restrictive
regulations in the historic district, and people
didn't know about that. And that was always the
story we were getting. So we felt like by putting in
these signs saying, here are these districts, and
then changing the street signs and putting in
these brown signs with special symbols on them and
logos, that people would figure out there was,
hey, something's going on here. And we could use it
as part of our educational campaign. At that time,
we were working with Peter Brink in the Galveston
Historical Foundation. He was the executive
director. We were working with him on the Strand
and what we could do to help them in the way traffic
circulation, various kinds of grants and
consultants came in. The foundations were very
interested in helping out the strand. The Harris
Foundation, the Kempners, the Moody Trust, all of
these groups were very interested in doing
something to encourage economic development and
to preserve the kind of heritage of Galveston at
the same time. Pete Fredrickson was on our
planning commission. He was a city councilman who
also served as ex-officio on our planning
commission. And he was one of the individuals who
was working on restoration of the Alissa, which is
a sailing ship that's in Galveston now. And he
worked very diligently with other people to bring
that about, with Polly Guido and some other folks,
to try to build on Galveston's unique culture and
heritage. rewarding for the staff that we had in
our offices to be able to work with these kind of
people, the local groups. We did find groups with
specialized interests that were extremely
helpful to us, giving us technical assistance,
giving us behind-the-scenes political clout.
And I have to admit, I was naive in that respect. I
really didn't know how many of the ideas I was
floating, our staff was floating, that were
legitimately good ideas that were winning on
their own merits versus how many were being sold by
these supporters and advocates for us. But I do
know that we had tremendous support from a number
of very influential special interest groups. And
they were very active people. And when I go back to
Galveston today, I run into them. And they
remembered what we did during those couple of
years. And the political climate has changed. And
Roger can't do those. The planning director at
Galveston couldn't do Very many of the things that
we were able to do in the two years I was there. I
happened to be there at the right time for really
being able to have significant impact. We had an
energy conservation demonstration program. We
were one of 17 cities that received a grant from the
state of Texas. We produced an energy
conservation handbook designed for the East End
Historic District, for our neighborhood, one of
our specific neighborhoods. There's a lot of
material around on energy conservation, but we
wanted something designed just for Galveston
Island, just for our own geographic area. Plus, we
needed something designed for the unique kinds of
housing we had on Galveston Island, especially
with all the historical property that we had, the
very older structures. So we produced a very
specialized document, ideally designed and
trained and suited for Galveston. We also
produced a number of workshops where we gave
residents hands-on experience, got them to come
in and learn how to do various things, how to make
their houses more energy efficient. It was
particularly important because some of the older
houses, contrary to public perception about how
energy efficient these older homes are, are
extremely inefficient. So it was important to be
able to show them how to make these houses more
energy efficient without losing historical
character, and therefore making it possible for
them to afford to live in those units instead of
being driven out. We processed grants from the
state, from the Coastal Energy Impact Program. We
were able to bring in several grants. I wish I could
remember what all they were. One of them was for
purchasing parkland along the west end of the
island before it was developed so we'd have public
access to the beaches. Part of it was used in our
parking program where we were trying to move
vehicles off the beaches and put them into
designated parking areas. We did an oil and gas
master plan. At the time we were there, the
drilling for oil and gas became very
controversial. Galveston did not have
regulations that prohibited drilling for oil and
gas on most of the island. Parts of the built-up
area were protected, but vast areas were not. The
environmentally sensitive areas were not, and
offshore drilling was not regulated. So we worked
with a couple of the citizen groups that were very
interested in doing this. They had enough
pressure, enough influence that they were able to
make, and the council wasn't interested in this
emergency, They were able to make the council call
an election to put a charter provision requiring
the preparation of an oil and gas master plan and
the regulation of drilling and requiring voter
approval of that plan. And we did that. We prepared
a plan. The first plan, I'm thinking maybe the
first plan did not pass. The second plan was
approved by the voters. And we did come up with some
very fine regulations. controlling the drilling
for oil and gas. And at that time, I also served as
the petroleum superintendent, in addition to
being the director of planning and traffic. The
major concern or fear was that, on offshore
drilling, that there might be a mishap or an
accident, and that a spill might wash ashore and
ruin the beaches. And Galveston depends so
heavily on beaches and tourism. that that would
have been devastating to the local economy. So one
of the provisions in our plan was to limit the
seasonal drilling so that if the spill took place,
it would do it at the right time of the year when
prevailing winds would take it away and you'd have
a chance to recover, et cetera. So we did actually
produce a plan called an oil and gas master plan. We
produced ordinances that were both approved by
the voters and adopted by the city council. We
attempted to do some things in the area of
beautification. There was growing interest in
that. improving the physical appearance of the
island. There was an awareness that the island was
not as pretty as it could be. And in many respects,
it's extremely degrading what has been done with
urbanization, that concrete seawall. We did come
up with some beautification plans for the
seawall. Rogers continued and expanded on those
beautification plans. They involved planters.
We attempted to landscape one of the parking lanes
on the seawall for some area and put some fill in
dirt and grass on top of that concrete seawall in
certain places. And we worked with the Corps. We
were able to get that through the Corps and the
county. It was very difficult, but finally we were
able to convince them to do that. But I think it was
probably the merchants more than anybody that
kept us from putting that landscaping in and
really doing something that would have been
beneficial. Also, the traffic engineer that
worked under me at that time was not supportive of
these efforts and was more interested in moving
traffic along the seawall than he was in
beautifying it. And he was a behind-the-scenes
person who worked to stop us from doing these
things. I attempted to take truck parking off of
Seawall Boulevard at that time and got some
support, but when it really came down to it, The
council voted without any public discussion,
voted and rejected unanimously. So I never did
understand the politics of that. But I know there
was some behind the scenes maneuvering on that. It
was a very valid concept to remove those trucks up
there when they were parking on the seawall in
front of restaurants and motels and hotels. It was
literally blocking off the view for hundreds and
hundreds of feet. For the people who were in the
restaurants and motels and hotels and the windows
who were living there, who were staying there with
the idea of seeing, you know, experiencing
Galveston. All they were experiencing was the
sight of a refrigerated truck or moving truck or
something. Try to establish a traffic diverter
program in the neighborhoods. Galveston has a
grid system, street system. Every street's a
thoroughfare. In particular, around the medical
center. There's a problem with all the
thoroughfare streets. And the medical center is
close to the port. So we were getting heavy truck
traffic, a lot of medical center traffic, student
traffic, faculty traffic through our
residential neighborhoods. And it was a serious
parking problem because the university wasn't
providing the parking that they should have been
doing. So I attempted to come up with a traffic
diverter program where the streets would not
intersect through. There would be a diagonal
divider, a landscape divider. And you would have
to make a turn to be able to move. That is something
that also failed. On a split vote, the traffic
commission was opposed to it. We got the
neighborhoods to support it. We were going to put
our first one in over by an elementary school,
which would have been extremely valuable to do.
But the traffic engineer fought us tooth and nail.
He strung that out. And I left before I was able to
get that issue up to the council. I don't believe
they ever followed through with
it. I spent a lot of time educating the planning
commission. We spent good money, good to city
money, sending our commissioners to
conferences, to short courses, signing them up as
members of the American Planning Association,
seeing they got publications. I put on a number of
workshops for them. I gave them a notebook that was
prepared by me based on some materials I had
previously written, plus some other written
information that other planners had done that I
retyped, giving proper credit to the people that
did it, put it in a notebook format, and gave it to
our commissioners. It was probably a 15-chapter
notebook. It was a handbook for planning
commissioners is what it was entitled. And it was
on such things as introduction to comp, to
planning, introduction to the planning
commission,
sign regulations, I'm trying to remember some of
the other chapters. Gosh, this is horrible. I'm
trying to blank on this. Introduction to the
Community Development Block Grant Program.
Basic rudimentary kinds of planning
information. The principles, concepts, and
standards for residential development, for
commercial development. Just basic rudimentary
studies. I tried to do for them in two years what you
would to a graduate planning student. Of course, I
didn't have near the time. But we attempted to have
a workshop at least once a month where there was no
regulation, no current planning being
conducted, strictly educational session, study
session. I felt it was extremely important to
raise their level of knowledge and expertise. I
knew I wasn't going to be there forever. I knew our
staff, which was very young and aggressive, very
confident, was not going to be there in future
years. So I wanted to leave a presence behind a
strong supporting presence for planning. And so I
put a lot of my time and energy in building up the
knowledge and the capability of that planning
commission. And I think that that was probably as
responsible and as much responsible for our
eventual successes there in the latter year that I
was there as much as anything. The commission came
alive, was excited about planning, was
enthusiastic about it. They looked forward to
those workshop sessions. They put tremendous
pressure on staff to come forward with new and
aggressive and innovative ideas. One of the
subjects they brought up was the landscaping
ordinance. We talked about beautification. We
did pass landscaping orders requiring that
parking lots be landscaped, requiring that
peripheral boundaries be landscaped, requiring
that development on certain major streets on the
island be landscaped for aesthetic reasons, 100%
purely aesthetics. Very successful. A lot of
these things don't sound very significant to you,
but if you'd understand that we started from zero,
no support for planning, no support for
regulation, very conservative kind of
community, to think that you could go in there and
accomplish and impose these kinds of restrictive
standards and regulations and do these things in a
planning area, you know, it's just astonishing to
people. At the same time, we were interested in
landscaping. was a group interested in doing
something about billboard regulations. Now, the
challenge of that was that the chairman of the
planning commission, Jules Love, owned the local
sign company. So the council appointed a
subcommittee. And Jules was on that subcommittee
along with several other people. And they
produced a report and got it back to the
commission. And it was a good report. It had some
good recommendations. But when it got to the
commission, it had been watered down a little bit
by Jules. But when it got to the commission,
Carolyn Stiles, in particular, was able to take
that and really expand it and go beyond the basic
minimum regulations to something much greater
than that, even taking down existing billboards
and freezing the number that were there and coming
up with some simplistic kinds of trade-offs. If
you want this, you take two down. If you want this,
you do something else. And that was very
successful, in my view. It was good support for
that. We were able to do that, get those changes.
Oh, in the area of energy conservation, one of the
things I forgot to mention was we instituted an
energy audit program where our city staff would go
out and audit houses and give people an idea of what
they could do to make their houses energy
efficient, give them kind of a printout. We
designed these things to give a printout to them,
showing them what could be done in the order of
priority that would pay for itself and what would
be the payout to do that. What's interesting about
that is We'd only been offering that about three
months when the federal government passed some
national legislation requiring local utility
companies to offer that service. So we were there
doing something that was taken over by the local
utility companies. We did come up with some
preliminary zoning performance standards for
the canals, wetland areas, and drainage areas.
But we never implemented them. We did have the
standards. We tried to make reference to them in
our PUD. in the processing of our PUD requests. But
we were never able to put those into ordinance
format. Now, after I left, I believe about a year
after I left, Roger Hedrick was able to get some of
these standards adopted. And I think they do have
much more, much stronger controls now than they do
when I was there. A lot of the interest and support
for environmental planning no longer exists. And
Roger's not going to ever be near as effective as I
was. The planner that I'd hired right away finally
left because he was so discouraged by the change in
political environment there. And they were
elected to the city to continue to see us poke our
nose into the environmental areas, which didn't
have that much support from the citizens. So
that's in summary what we were able to do in a very
short period of time, two years. We tried to make up
for a period of 10 to 15 years of neglect in
planning. and probably one of the most productive
two years in my life. I was enthusiastic. It was the
first time that I was really a planning director
where I had professional staff. I had kind of
served as a planning director in a very small city
for two years while I was going to school, but never
had I had the chance to be in charge With complete
freedom. I had complete freedom. The city manager
did not dictate to me, did not direct my program
efforts. I had 100% authority to look at anything
and to do anything and everything that I wanted to
do. And I had complete freedom to bring it up to the
commission and the council and take the heat for
it. The council, I would say, was reluctant to pass
many of the things that they did. In summary here,
they was reluctant to do it. They were not
enthusiastic supporters of planning or of
regulations. They kept being forced into it. And I
felt like our technical work was so sound. Our
logic was so good. Our justification for it was so
good. Our press coverage was so supportive. And
not just local, but the Houston papers and the
Houston news stations as well. And then the
behind-the-scenes influence that many of our
commissioners and our special interest groups
had in the community. All that in combination made
it a but mean hog heaven for a planner. It was an
ideal time, a very exciting time. I was
disappointed to leave. I left the island
primarily because my wife didn't like Galveston.
She wanted to pursue her education. Galveston has
no educational opportunities for higher
education, unless you want to be a medical
student.
I had the chance to go to a larger community, double
the size, Beaumont, Texas. And there was a good
city manager there who sold me on that. And going to
that city, too, told me that I could do in Beaumont
what I did in Galveston. And he'd be supportive of
it. And he wanted me over there. So that kind of new
challenge and the chance to make my wife happy, I
made the decision to move on over there. I've been
tempted a couple of times to go back. I know that the
current city manager was the assistant city
manager when I was there. We're very good friends,
personal friends. And Steve was a great person to
work with there on the staff. And he's talked to me a
couple of times about coming back and one of these
years they may end up twisting my arm and getting me
back down there. Is there any particular
legislation, state and federal, that's really
impacted Galveston's planning?
Well, not in the mandatory sense. Galveston was
doing things for the right reason. We were doing
plans because they were useful, because they were
needed. And we were always, the end state wasn't
the plan. The plan was the means of giving us a
strategy, the mechanism, the step-by-step
approach to getting to where we wanted to go. So
Galveston did not necessarily benefit from any
kind of legislation that I was ever aware of.
Secondarily, we did. Sure, the Coastal Zone
Energy Impact Program was beneficial to us. It
gave us some money to use for acquisitions, for
development. But we weren't using monies for
planning purposes. We did have some
transportation planning money.